So, recently we're seeing a lot more
layoffs in big tech companies. Amazon
just laid off 16,000 of them and they're
going to cut 14,000 more.
And then we also see Meta is planning to
cut 20% of the company, which is the
biggest number I've ever seen from Meta.
So, I know people are concerned,
especially with the narrative that AI is
taking all of our jobs and that these
layoffs are the results of that.
I think that's partly true. AI does
accelerate the natural cycle of layoffs,
but I I don't think it tells the full
story. You know, I personally think that
layoffs are inevitable in any
competitive industry and tech is just a
very, very competitive industry. I
personally think that we are all
responsible in some ways for the layoffs
and there was nothing we can do to stop
it.
It might sound counterintuitive, but I I
think the reason why we have layoffs is
because everyone involved is making the
most optimal, rational decisions.
Everyone played their hand perfectly,
which unfortunately resulted in layoffs.
The executive team is not dumb for over
hiring. Managers are not dumb for
mismanaging their teams. Nobody's dumb,
even though it ends up being a bad
outcome for a lot of people.
But the funny thing is, if they had a
chance to do it all over again,
I think they'd do it all over again in
the same exact way and layoffs will
happen. Now, I know a lot of you are
thinking about how to protect yourself
from layoffs, which which I will get to.
But before that, let me tell you how to
protect yourself from bad actors on the
internet because today's sponsor is my
favorite, NordVPN. Now, I always make
sure to keep a habit of using a VPN,
especially when I'm traveling and I have
no idea who controls these Wi-Fi spots.
With NordVPN, it's pretty easy because
of how seamless it is. Not only does it
protect me, but it also helps me change
regions super quickly. For example, if
I'm in Canada at my parents' place, some
TV shows just aren't available there.
But, I can VPN back into the US and
watch them. Or, just today, I wanted to
browse some Japanese Fender guitars. I
know, I play guitar. But, the website
kept bringing me back to the American
website. So, luckily, I was able to use
NordVPN to change my region to Japan and
visit the Fender Japan website, so I can
fantasize about the guitar I want to
buy. But, NordVPN isn't just about
switching regions. I always keep threat
protection pro turned on. It can detect
phishing website, and then it blocks
them before I even do anything. You
know, it works in the background even
when you're not connected to a VPN
server. So, your device stays shielded
24/7.
So, stay safe. Go to nordvpn.com/joma2
to get a huge discount with the 30-day
money-back guarantee. All right. So, as
I was saying, everyone's making the most
optimal, rational decision here. It It's
kind of like a prisoner's dilemma, but
with thousands of players. And because
everyone is rational, we're in this like
deadlock that guarantees layoffs. So,
here's the high-level summary, and I'll
go deeper in it into each later.
So, first,
companies have competition.
They have to win over customers. And the
only way to expand their business is to
hire more people to work at the company.
Since it's competitive, they have to
hire fast, faster than their
competitors. And since they need to hire
fast, the only way to do it is to lower
the bar of hiring. You can't wait for
top top talent. You just need people to
execute. So, you bring in what I call
the career arbitrageurs, right? People
whose incentives are mostly money. But,
they're still useful to grow the
company. Now, because the company is big
and public, your work at the company
doesn't really influence the success of
the company. So, even if you get paid in
equity, it it doesn't really mean much,
right? You're there to clock in and
clock out and try to survive another
day.
And because of that, there's lower
incentive for an employee to go above
and beyond and take risks for the
company. The expected value of doing the
best work for the company is often lower
than if you would just do moves that
make you look good or that makes you
survive. For example, they optimize for
stability and creating an environment
where they can last a long time at the
company.
The talent pool is also diluted because
of fast hiring. So, now the company has
to compensate by having like
bureaucracy, babysitters, managers,
performance reviews, goal setting, all
of these mechanisms to try to
incentivize employees to do the right
thing for the company. But, that creates
a lot of bloat. At some point, there are
so many actors within the company who
work more on creating smokes and mirrors
to deflect attention to them or to
exaggerate the impact of their team
rather than just actually doing the work
that furthers the company along. The
company then wonders, "Why is the output
so low even with so many people?"
There's a lot of complex organizational
cobwebs
that makes it extremely hard to know
which ones are actually the lazy actors
and which ones are the liars that are
forming paychecks versus the ones who
are actually doing the work, who are
actually furthering the company.
So, you need to reset by laying off a
lot of people, unfortunately. Layoffs
have a lot of false positive. A lot of
good people get laid off because it will
take a lot more money and time to
individually surgically go figure out
who's bad, who's good. It's easier to do
just one sweep and then maybe rehire the
ones that they made a mistake on.
For example, if you had a bunch of
cables on your computer, right, and some
were redundant, some were useless,
it might be easier to just unplug all
the cables
and then figure out which cables are
necessary and then reconnect the ones
that are needed instead of tracing each
cable one by one in in cobweb of a mess
and then trying to figure out which ones
are useful. That's just inefficient.
It's the same exact thing. You would
have done the same thing. So, I want to
expand on this part.
So, no matter what, companies need to
hire fast if they want to be
competitive. But, you might bring up
like Netflix, right? They're known to
hire extremely high performers to
increase their talent density, so you
don't need to babysit them. They're all
about removing control,
and then let them be independent so they
can do the best work and make the best
decisions.
But, to find these high performers, it
takes a lot of time. Even if you're
paying top dollars, which Netflix does,
it takes a lot of time to find those
diamond in the rough.
And it only worked for Netflix because
it literally had no competitors almost
back then. They were literally the only
legit streaming service out there. That
was before like HBO and everything. For
example, if you had competitors, it's
grow or die. If you had the choice to
make a profit of $200,000
or $150,000,
which one would you pick?
You'd probably pick the $200,000, right?
Even if the ROI is technically lower
because you had to spend 400k to earn
600k, which is a 1.5 extra turn. Instead
of the second example, where you had to
spend $150,000
and earn $300,000.
But, in a world of competition, if you
don't grow as fast as your peers, it
doesn't matter how well-written your app
is or how high your talent density is at
your company. When you're losing market
share to competitor who's hiring way
faster and expanding way faster than
you, it doesn't matter. You just want to
get stuff done, so you're going to hire
more people to get more output even
though it's less efficient because the
talent density is lower.
And that's exactly what happened during
COVID. Amazon and Meta doubled their
head count in 3 years because there was
suddenly so many more potential
customers. People were at home using
tech products, and to satisfy that
demand and exploit it, you got to hire
engineers to build all those features
and to scale. And if you don't, you lose
your market share. You know, they'll
either scroll on Facebook instead of
YouTube or they'll use Microsoft Azure
instead of AWS. So, then the hiring bar
lowers, as I said, and then shitty
talent comes in and then that's where I
come in, right? I'm an opportunist. All
I see is high pay, nice perks, and
seemingly easy job. Someone like me
who's in college will optimize for this
path to get into one of the companies
that are over hiring. Since I think that
the money they're paying is the highest
I can get with my limited skill set. I
am making the optimal move for myself,
given that I don't care about what I
work on. These are the people who would
have gone into investment banking in the
'90s, consulting in the 2000s, and now
in tech. They are very competent, very
rational, but most importantly, they
have zero passion for anything. They
optimize for something quantifiable
only, for money.
So, let me ask you a question. Would you
still be working in tech if it paid like
If your answer is no, then you are
probably this person. You are part of
the diluted talent pool. No shame in
that. You know, we might not start
companies, but we help billionaires grow
their existing companies, which is still
an important role. Now, when a company
is small,
the incentive structure is super simple.
For example, let's say it's only
founders. All founders of the company
want the company to succeed because
their future payout is literally tied to
the company's success. So,
decision-making is very easy. They're
already aligned in doing what's best for
the company because if the company
succeeds, they succeed. But as the
company gets bigger, though,
and it's filled with arbitrageurs who
are more motivated by their
self-interest, which again, which is
very rational and the optimal move to
make, what you get is misaligned
incentives. The work that you do will
most likely have very little to do with
whether a company succeeds or not. It's
like voting. Yes, you have an impact,
but if you did poorly at your job, it's
not like it will blow the whole thing
over.
For you to truly do a good job, to pick
truly important projects for the
company,
that might be a drop in the bucket for
the next earning calls, right? But that
will require you three times more
effort, which might yield you a I don't
know 15% bigger bonus, assuming that you
did a good year that year. So how is
that worth it? The incentive for the
employee would be to figure out how to
maximize your pay while minimizing your
effort, and not how to improve the
company. Sometimes these two things are
not aligned. For example, some workers
want to get promoted as fast as
possible. Maybe they even cut corners
doing so,
so that they can collect a bigger
paycheck. And then the work you choose
isn't always what's best for the
company, but it's the best for
promotions if you play the game right.
And that's a very valid strategy. Or
some workers might choose to cruise and
minimize the effort, stay at the same
level, and just collect paychecks.
That's also a valid strategy.
Now this isn't limited to individual
contributors. It's especially true for
managers and directors. You can
exaggerate how complicated your scope is
or how important your team is to the
company if you're good at lying.
And that protects your whole team. The
fact is that the company doesn't have a
full picture because the company's just
too big. So they rely on proxies like
performance review, team size,
organizational structure, peer feedback,
documentation about who got credit for
what work. Every one of these measurable
proxies can be cheated though. And
employees will find the path of least
resistance to cheat them and to get what
they want. Whether that's keeping their
job or getting a promo or a raise or
making their team big or
or taking on projects that seem a lot
more important so that you can get a
bigger paycheck.
The path of least resistance is rarely
the path that helps the company the
most, unfortunately. If everyone was a
high performer,
actually not even high performer, a
principal performer, and worked like a
hive mind, and every employee is
aligned, companies wouldn't even need to
fire people or have performance reviews.
These things that bloat companies like
bureaucracy, goal setting, performance
evaluation, bonuses
are all necessary to steer the company
slightly more in the right direction,
even though that these processes slows
things down.
You rather be going slow than going
backwards, right?
So again, employees are completely
rational in performing at work in a way
that optimizes their payout instead of
the company's interest. And the company
is also completely rational in setting
up all these processes and management
layers.
And finally, you press the reset button,
and you start shaving off the diseased,
right? Those are layoffs. The teams that
are completely useless, the low
performers, and the leeches, we're
trying to get rid of that. You can't be
surgical about it, so you just have to
do a broad stroke. It's like if a city
is infected with zombies,
even if there's some people living in
there, unfortunately, they're just going
to bomb the whole place. That's
that's the safest thing to do.
All right, so I guess what I'm trying to
say is there's no bad actor in this
whole layoff saga.
Everyone played their cards exactly
right. I guess if you're concerned about
the layoffs, there's a few things you
can do to avoid the bomb.
There's two types of adjustments you can
make. You can do both.
But the left side, I call them the
principal macro adjustments. These are
the adjustments that make your true ROI,
your return on investment as an
employee, higher.
You can do that by getting paid less. If
you're not overpriced, people are less
likely going to look at you to fire you.
The most overpriced employees are
usually the ones who force themselves
into a promo, even though they're not
executing at that level. They're usually
nervous, burnt out all the time,
and they usually optimize on promos
rather than developing their skills.
So, think twice before you ask for a
promotion. You can also go to a company
that pays less, and more likely than not
you'd be very high performer there since
the pool isn't as competitive and you'll
survive.
So, next is when you're selecting a
team,
make sure you choose a team that's a
high priority for the company. For
example, ads, AWS, monetization, any of
those kind of teams, they're not likely
going anywhere because it's obvious that
they make profit for the company. Even
if you're extremely good or you're very,
very impactful within your team,
but if your team is experimental and
doesn't actually make money for the
company, your true ROI might still be
low. It has nothing to do with you, and
you're very, very competent, and you
deliver on all the work, but the work is
just not that useful for the company.
So, technically, your true ROI is still
pretty low.
Okay.
So, the downside of choosing those high
ROI teams, though, is that they're
usually very well established and
they're not fun.
And because they're very well
established, the direction that they
need to go is very clear. So, the leads
know exactly how much juice to juice out
of you. That's why whenever you join a
new company, you always hear like, "Oh
man, don't join the monetization team.
Don't join the cloud computing team. Oh
my god, the work is so hard over there."
Or like they make you work 24/7 and
stuff like that.
That's probably why because they have a
very clear direction on where to go, and
they know exactly how to extract that
out of you.
So, the last one is
increase your impact. Be someone who can
identify what is impactful work and then
do that work.
I also added use AI right now because
the only way to have an outsize impact
is to increase your output. And
currently, if you're not using AI to
write code or to do your job, you might
get out-competed by someone who does.
It's similar to if calculators existed,
but you're still calculating things by
hand. It just makes no sense.
All right. So, then on the other side of
this spectrum, there are tactical
micro-adjustments.
These don't actually change anything
about you. You're not getting any
better, and your ROI stays the same.
But, you can make these optical
illusions to make you seem better than
you are. And these are a lot easier to
pull off.
So, the first one is choose a manager
that likes you. In the end, the company
needs input to figure out who to lay
off, right? Figure out where those
inputs come from. Usually, it's from
your manager.
Unless they're getting fired. But, make
sure that you're on the good side of the
people who make these decisions or who
give input into the company to figure
out who to fire. Next, when you work on
projects, make sure you
over-communicate.
And also over-exaggerate how difficult
your projects are and how impactful your
projects are. Make a lot of noise. Just
be seen.
That creates an illusion that you are
valuable.
I personally hate that, but that's just
how the world works. And if everyone
else does it, you have to do it, too.
Like, if the tree falls down, but no
one's there to hear it. Did it really
fall down or or something like that? You
know what I mean.
And then the last one
is try to figure out what vanity metrics
are important
for your company. Like, a toy example,
like let's say there's a shitty
fictional company. They might look at
the number of lines of code you've
written or the number of pull requests
you merge. And they'll use that as a
proxy of how productive you are.
And if you know that, optimize for that.
Create smaller pull requests, write
bloated code. Currently at my company, I
have a feeling they're looking at how
much you use AI because most company
believes that if you're using AI, you're
way more productive. So, if you don't
jump on the trend, you're going to fall
behind. So, they're probably looking at
your AI usage.
So, what you can do is every morning
just ask a lot of questions to AI even
if you don't have any questions, or just
write a lot of code using AI.
Okay, so here's the catch.
When too many people start making these
tactical micro-adjustments, well, that's
actually a big reason why there's
layoffs. It's because people optimize
too much on the optics and about how to
survive another year at the company
instead of actually doing the real work
that makes you better and increase your
output like on the macro-adjustments.
And that's why companies can't tell
apart someone who truly has a high ROI
versus someone who is creating all these
smokes and mirrors to make them seem
like they are high ROI.
And that is why they need layoffs
so that they can reset.
All right, that's pretty much what I'll
talk about today and I'll see you next
time.